# How can we protect the Brazilian Amazon rainforest?

This essay believes that the Brazilian Amazon rainforest (also known as the Amazon, not to be confused with the Amazon River) should be protected, and will detail how. This essay also believes that the current deforestation in the Amazon be curbed as soon as possible, through effective laws and restrictions that do not negatively impact the Amazon’s biodiversity, or the people standing to make a profit from the Amazon’s deforestation.
The Amazon rainforest is the largest tropical rainforest and is crucial to maintaining the human familiar climate patterns, over large areas, in addition to the incredible biodiversity and potential for sustaining the livelihoods of the large number of indigenous people. Over 60% of the Amazon rainforest is located in Brazil with the next largest country having around only 13% of the forest inside its borders. Therefore, when we think of conserving the Amazon rainforest, the Brazilian Amazon immediately comes to mind as it is the largest portion and the region most under threat of deforestation.
The Brazilian Amazon rainforest, covering much of north-western Brazil and extending into Colombia, Peru and other South American countries, is the world’s largest tropical rainforest, famed for its biodiversity and importance to the world. It is crisscrossed by thousands of rivers, including the powerful Amazon River. It coverers 6.7 million km² of land, around twice the size of India! However, this is rapidly decreasing due to harmful actions on the rainforest itself.
The Amazon is home to the world's largest remaining tropical rainforest. Aside from being the biggest remaining tropical rainforest, it also houses a significant portion of the planet's known biodiversity. The river that feeds it is also responsible for about 16% of the world's total water discharge. The diversity across and around the Amazon rainforest is home to over 30 million people living in a region that's divided into nine different political systems! According to  COICA, about 9% – 2.7 million – of the Amazon’s population is indigenous. Over 60 indigenous groups are still isolated.
The Amazon rainforest is key to Brazil’s economy, through its deforestation. The land is often removed quickly for cattle ranching and farming (e.g. soy beans, coffee beans, oranges, and sugarcanes). The land’s removal is usually through the slash-and-burn method, which is where parts of a forest or woodland are cut down and left to dry before the rainy season, and then set on fire, eventually creating a field called a swidden. The ash produced from the incinerated vegetation results in a fertile, nutrient-rich layer of soil, allowing plants to grow prosperously due to the temporary elimination of weed and pest species as well. However, after about only 3 to 5 years, the plot’s productivity experiences a sharp decrease due to the depletion of nutrients along with weed and pest invasion. This causes the deforesters to move to another area and repeat the harmful process just to create fertile land for less than half a decade. It can take a depleted swidden up to 20 years to recover until it can be slashed-and-burnt again, showing how this process is clearly unsustainable.

This creation of farmland supports Brazil’s economy heavily – it is the number one producer worldwide of soy beans, used not only for the vegetarian and vegan needs of people worldwide, but also as a widespread means for animal feed - much of the chicken sold in European markets is fed on Brazilian soy. 
In the Amazon, deforestation creates fields and farmland to allow cattle ranching, farming , digging for minerals and colonisation projects to be carried out. At the same time, the creation of roads along this new cleared forestry opens up access to previously inaccessible forests that could be cleared by farmers or illegal loggers. Land speculators are sadly involved too.
The Amazon has lost over 17% of its forest cover during the last half century, and its connectivity has been severely disrupted. As a result, many endemic species have been severely affected by the exploitation of its natural resources for economic reasons. The Amazon's role is linked to regional climate patterns, with its canopy cover helping to regulate the temperature and humidity. Despite its massive carbon footprint, the forests of the Amazon have the potential to significantly alter global climate, as they cycle a large amount of water and oxygen. Additionally, the Amazon rainforest is anecdotally referred to as the ‘lungs of the world’ due to it contributing to around 16 percent of the oxygen produced by photosynthesis on land, making up a key part of the world’s ecosystem as a whole: it would be a devastating loss if the world lost the Amazon.
If the amount of cleared forest land reaches 25 percent (currently 17%), there won't be enough trees cycling moisture through the rainforest. This would cause the rainforest to lose all its moisture, eventually degrading into a basic, empty savanna, which would be fatal for the rich biodiversity currently living in the Amazon, and potentially causing significant harm globally due to unexpected butterfly effects.
The loss of culture due to deforestation in the Amazon is appalling. Many native tribespeople live in settled villages by rivers and grow their own vegetables and fruits, keeping small cattle farms to live off of. These tribes who have lived in the Amazon for many generations do not destroy the wildlife or biodiversity, unlike the illegal loggers and land speculators who are invading the Amazon. Almost all the tribes’ problems revolve around their cultivated, naturally cleared land: outsiders either want their land, or something on it. The key threats to the indigenous people and their land are rampant illegal logging and the rapid spread of ranching and farming.
Agricultural commodities are the biggest sector in the Brazilian economy, and they are the primary cause of deforestation in the Amazon. Cattle ranching (cattle farms over large, clear pastures) and soy farms are the specific reasons for this: Brazil is the main exporter of soy in the world right now.

It would not be so easy as to just enforce Brazil’s government to pass laws to immediately stop all deforestation in the Amazon: it would have to be a gradual process decreasing deforestation in an agreeable process for all over a period of time. This is because agricultural commodities make up most of the Brazilian economy, so producers of agricultural commodities and the government as well would never agree to stopping deforestation immediately: the current president of Brazil himself Jair Bolsonaro made campaign promises to open the Amazon to extractive industries, opening more jobs in the agricultural business industry. He immediately started dismantling protections for the Amazon when he took office in January 2019. Deforestation increased sharply thereafter, reaching levels not seen for the past decade. He had also suggested that Brazil could pull out of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change, arguing that its requirements compromise Brazil's sovereignty over the Amazon region. On top of that, Bolsonaro has also has taken steps to slowly start removing protections for indigenous land and to make it easier for non-indigenous Brazilians to carry out economic activity in the Amazon.
It is concerning that the rate of deforestation has accelerated significantly in the last few years: between August 2020 and July 2021, the rainforest lost 10,476 square kilometres – an area nearly thirteen times the size of New York City! This loss was the highest annual level in a decade, which a new report from a reputable primary source, Imazon, has released. The last time it was this bad was in 2012. This can be directly attributed to the current political climate in Brazil where the elected government is choosing not to strictly enforce its own forestry laws: instead, they look the other way when there is a question of excessive deforestation.
The Amazon rainforest’s economic benefits through clearing forest land unsustainably and replacing it with pasture, crops and colonisation projects do propose a serious argument to just leaving the standing forest alone, as it would generate no money. The only way to preserve biodiversity while making a slight profit would be to make it a sustainable rainforest: for every tree cut down, more would be planted. However, this would not generate enough money to keep agricultural commodities as the biggest sector in Brazil – it would never be able to support the economy this way. 
The main problem that faces the Amazon is not Brazil’s forestry laws themselves: it is the enforcement that is the problem. Many farmers and illegal loggers exploit the lax enforcement that occurs when regarding the Brazilian Amazon itself, as the profits they stand to gain from it are much higher. A key, short-term remedy would be a conference between big agricultural business figures in Brazil and environmentalists who would be able to explain solutions to curb the deforestation occurring in the Amazon, which the businesspeople would be able to evaluate and choose from.
Despite not being able to stop deforestation outright in one go, there are still 2 main methods that can fix the Amazon’s deforestation and keep the agricultural commodities sector intact in Brazil. These two solutions are just a few of many possible ones as well!
The first one is to help large soy producers comply with national laws e.g. preserving habitats on at least 20% of their property. Many large companies demanding soy are utilising data tools to their fullest to reveal the soy producers linked to illicit deforestation e.g. France rejecting all Brazilian soy exports completely in 2020. Helping soy producers comply with these laws on deforestation and preservation of biodiversity would help to build trust between profit-maximising producers and soy-demanding consumers wanting deforestation-free soy. This would be a win-win solution for all, with the producers potentially making slightly reduced net profits, but more consumers accepting their deforestation-free soy. 
The second method would be to enforce all farmers to produce on degraded land, instead of trying to convert parts of the Amazon. Scientific research has concluded that using (the same amount of) degraded land (indirectly human-impacted land) instead of cleared out forestry could let farmers double their soy production. The main part about this would be the legality – there would be no illicit activity involved. However, growing crops on degraded land is more expensive than growing crops on forested land, which is a major downside. Nevertheless, this could be combatted with more subsidies created by the Brazilian government for the purpose of setting up farms on degraded land. Additionally, farmers could just first use up the 15-20 million hectares of already deforested and degraded land. Furthermore, if the Brazilian government was not willing to set up subsidies, the UN Environment Programme and other partners have started the Responsible Commodities Facility to provide low interest loans to Brazilian soy and corn farmers, who have clearly committed to using degraded grassland instead of deforested land for their agriculture. Due to the farmers responsibly growing their produce, the global market would open up to them and welcome them a lot more: France would most probably stop blocking Brazilian agricultural commodity exports at some point if they were mostly legal, when considering Brazil’s forestry laws.
These solutions pertain exclusively to soy plantations, but they could also be applied to coffee bean, sugarcane, and orange farms as well. Furthermore, grass could be made to grow on degraded land quite easily, so a solution for cattle ranchers would be to first utilise as much of the 15-20 million hectares of already deforested and degraded land for their cattle. They would also be able to buy the land through the Responsible Commodities Facility or through potential government subsidies.
To conclude, there are at least two main methods for conserving the Brazilian Amazon rainforest, with the main players in it still making profits without anywhere near as much deforestation. If both of these methods were implemented, it would satisfy the two main parties involved. The deforestation would almost nearly stop, satisfying the deforestation-free agricultural commodity consumers, and the producers as well, as there would be more consumers willing to buy their legal, sustainable products. This would save the largest and one of the crucial ecological biospheres in the world and make it more equitably useful to all the living beings involved.

## Bibliography
- Zimmer, K. (2019). Why the Amazon doesn’t really produce 20% of the world’s oxygen. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/why-amazon-doesnt-produce-20-percent-worlds-oxygen
- Irfan, U. (2019). Brazil’s Amazon rainforest destruction is at its highest rate in more than a decade. https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2019/11/18/20970604/amazon-rainforest-2019-brazil-burning-deforestation-bolsonaro
- Thomson, A. (2020). Biodiversity and the Amazon Rainforest. https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/biodiversity-and-the-amazon-rainforest/
- Watts, J. (2021). Amazon rainforest ‘will collapse if Bolsonaro remains president’. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/jul/14/amazon-rainforest-will-collapse-if-bolsonaro-remains-president
- Toohey, D. E. (2012). Indigenous Peoples, Environmental Groups, Networks and the Political Economy of Rainforest Destruction in Brazil. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41853029
- Seddon, G. (1985). THE CONSERVATION OF RAINFOREST. http://www.jstor.org/stable/45165085
- Prance, G & 1 other. (1996). The Amazon: Nature’s laboratory, mankind’s classroom. http://www.jstor.org/stable/45139326
- Butler, R. A. (2020). Brazil revises deforestation data: Amazon rainforest loss topped 10,000 sq km in 2019. https://news.mongabay.com/2020/06/brazil-revises-deforestation-data-amazon-rainforest-loss-topped-10000-sq-km-in-2019/
- Butler, R. A. (2021). Amazon Destruction. https://rainforests.mongabay.com/amazon/amazon_destruction.html
- Anon, Anon. (2020). How important is the Amazon Rainforest for the Brazilian economy?. https://www.greenbiz.com/article/how-important-amazon-rainforest-brazilian-economy
- Anon, Anon. (N/A). Inside the Amazon. https://wwf.panda.org/discover/knowledge_hub/where_we_work/amazon/about_the_amazon/
- Guerrero, A & 1 other. (2020). Demand for meat is driving deforestation in Brazil – changing the soy industry could stop it. https://theconversation.com/demand-for-meat-is-driving-deforestation-in-brazil-changing-the-soy-industry-could-stop-it-151060
- Rausch, L. L & 10 others. (2019). Soy expansion in Brazil's Cerrado. https://conbio.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/conl.12671
- Anon, Anon. (2018). Jair Bolsonaro beyond the sound bites: What are his policies?. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-45982501


[Click here](/index.md) to go back to the home page!

